{toc}



h1. What Fabric is
Fabric is a unified data and service platform that provides a single governed interface for ingesting, accessing, and delivering data across multiple transports and runtimes.

It sits between clients and existing systems, allowing producers and services to remain unchanged while Fabric standardizes access, governance, and operational behavior.

h1. What is available
Fabric provides a cohesive set of capabilities that can be adopted incrementally:

* *Entitlements* — A single, centralized access model that governs datasets, streams, and services consistently across all transports.
* *Ingestion* — Governed ingestion and routing of data from multiple sources into managed datasets and services.
* *Datasets* — Unified, tabular access to datasets through a single interface, independent of where data is stored or executed.
* *Streaming* — Publish/subscribe access to streams across multiple transports with consistent identity, schema, and entitlement enforcement.
* *Services* — Governed exposure of services across multiple runtime protocols with access control applied at the platform boundary.
* *Materialized* — Declaratively defined derived datasets managed as first-class platform assets.
* *Storage* — Open data storage using standard formats, accessible outside Fabric without loss of governance.
* *APIs* — A single client API for accessing datasets and streams across all supported transports, available in Java and Python, designed for efficient, zero-copy data access.

These capabilities are exposed through a single platform interface so clients interact with Fabric rather than individual systems.

h1. Governance-first platform
Governance is applied at the Fabric boundary rather than embedded in individual transports or storage systems.

Access is evaluated using a single entitlement model that applies consistently across datasets, streams, and services. Requests are authorized once at the platform boundary and enforced uniformly, regardless of how data is accessed or delivered.

Fabric supports acting on behalf of an end user (OBO) so services and applications can safely propagate user identity across transports while preserving auditability and policy enforcement.

h1. Open, portable, and deployable anywhere
Fabric is built around open standards and formats so data and services are not locked into proprietary systems.

Storage and compute can be local to a team or domain, allowing groups to operate independent “data ponds” using their own infrastructure while still benefiting from centralized governance.  

At the same time, Fabric integrates cleanly with strategic, centralized data lake platforms, allowing datasets to live in or be sourced from those environments when shared, large-scale analytics or cross-domain access is required. Fabric provides a consistent, governed access layer across both models, enabling teams to choose the appropriate storage and execution footprint for each workload.

Fabric is developed in-house with minimal third-party runtime dependencies. This deliberate design choice keeps the platform lean, reduces external vendor risk, and minimizes exposure to third-party CVEs while maintaining full control over behavior and security posture.

Fabric runs in standard environments, from developer machines to server hosts and container platforms, enabling consistent behavior across development and production deployments.
