{toc}


h2. Deployment topologies
Fabric supports multiple deployment topologies while preserving a consistent client experience:

* Local development on individual workstations for rapid iteration and testing.
* Shared service deployments on Linux hosts or virtual machines for team and application use.
* Container-based deployments (e.g. OpenShift) using the same configuration-driven model.
* Identical client interaction model across all deployment environments.

h2. Storage placement
Fabric does not mandate a single centralized storage system:

* Local storage for development and domain-specific workloads.
* Shared storage such as SAN for performance-sensitive or managed environments.
* Object storage such as S3 for scalable and durable data persistence.
* Domain-owned storage (“data ponds”) where teams manage their own compute and storage.
* Fabric provides governed access rather than imposing a proprietary storage layer.

Fabric can also act as a governed access layer over existing large-scale data platforms, including shared data lakes and specialized analytics systems.

h2. Global and multi-environment deployments
Fabric supports operation across environments and locations:

* Environment metadata separates development, testing, and production deployments.
* Region metadata enables global and multi-site deployments.
* Consistent discovery and access model across environments.
* Centralized governance and access control even when data and services are distributed.

Clients do not need to change behavior based on environment or location.

h2. Client-side integration and consumption
Fabric integrates directly with how clients and analysts work:

* Single client API surface for accessing datasets and streams.
* Java and Python client support.
* Native fit for interactive workflows such as notebooks.
* Efficient consumption by analytics tools and libraries (e.g. dataframes and array-based workflows).
* Zero-copy data exchange where possible to minimize serialization and data movement.
* Governance, identity, and access control preserved end-to-end.

h2. Integration reach
Fabric is designed for incremental adoption rather than platform replacement:

* Acts as a governed access layer over existing services and messaging systems.
* Allows clients to adopt Fabric immediately as their primary interface.
* Existing service providers and data platforms can remain unchanged.
* Migration to native Fabric patterns is optional and can occur over time.

This model enables organizations to standardize access and governance without disrupting existing systems.
